Decentralization Manager proposal (#298)
canton-foundation/canton-dev-fund: proposals/decentralization-manager.md

**Phase 3 (future proposal): Reward Management.** CIP-104 - compliant reward capture of FAR and distribution among decentralized party members and other stakeholders, a reward management dashboard, and enhanced health monitoring. Dependent on CIP-104 landing on Canton core.

**Phase 4 (future proposal): Dynamic Membership and Weighted Voting.** Add-member governance workflow with ACS synchronization, weighted voting, voting party delegation, and validator metadata. Dependent on ACS migration landing on Canton core.

## Motivation

**Reduce Centralization Risk.** Assets and applications on the Canton Network typically launch on nodes run by a single entity, or even a single validator node. This creates operational fragility: if the node goes offline, the application halts. It also creates concentration risk, as one entity controls all contract state. For applications handling tokenized assets, vaults, or liquidity pools, this single point of failure is unacceptable. Decentralized parties distribute trust and validation across multiple independent nodes, but the process of creating one today is manual, error-prone, and requires deep Canton protocol expertise.

> **Remove the Complexity Barrier.** Creating a decentralized party currently requires: (a) coordinating DNS and PartyToParticipant topology mapping across multiple nodes, (b) implementing Daml governance contracts for threshold signing, (c) building UIs for proposal and confirmation workflows, and (d) managing the operational lifecycle of members joining and leaving. No standardized tooling exists. Each team that wants to decentralize must build from scratch.

Reviewer: Might want to spell out Decentralized Namespace rather than use DNS.

Author: Spelled out, thank you!

### 2. Dependencies

No Canton-core dependencies block this proposal. All deliverables can be audited, open-sourced, and deployed on Canton MainNet using currently available Canton capabilities.

Canton-core dependencies (CIP-104 for reward distribution, ACS migration for dynamic add-member) will be addressed in their respective follow-up proposals and are not on the critical path for Phase 1.

### 3. Implementation Mechanics

The sections below describe the system as currently architected by BitSafe. Component and module names are used for clarity and do not represent final naming - the open-source release may adopt different conventions (example: "Plugins" may be renamed to "Modules").

#### 3.1 Topology Orchestration and Party Setup

The Decentralization Manager implements a 1-coordinator-N-peers model for decentralized party creation. A coordinator node initiates party setup and invites peer nodes to join. The system automates an 8-step workflow:

> 1. **WaitingForPeers** - Coordinator publishes invitation; peers accept or decline via UI

Reviewer: What long term role does Coordinator play or is this only the initiating peer in the long term quorum set?

Author: No special role - the coordinator is just the initiating peer. Anyone in the quorum set can be the initiator; once the party is set up, all peers operate as equals with no ongoing coordinator privileges.

2. **GenerateKeys** - Each node generates its signing key share for the shared party identity
3. **CreateProposals** - Coordinator computes DNS and PartyToParticipant topology proposals
4. **SignDns** - All parties sign the DNS mapping transaction
5. **SubmitDns** - DNS mapping submitted to the Canton topology store
6. **SignP2P** - All parties sign the PartyToParticipant mapping
7. **SubmitFinal** - Final topology transaction submitted; party identity active
8. **Complete** - All nodes confirm synchronization; party operational

The setup allows configuration of m-of-n thresholds (default: n/2), party ID prefixes, peer selection, and real-time progress monitoring. Threshold configuration is enforced at both the topology level and the governance level via `GovernanceSetThreshold` actions.

> All off-chain coordination between coordinator and peer nodes - invitation distribution, key share exchange, and signature collection - runs over a peer-to-peer transport built on the [Noise Protocol Framework](https://noiseprotocol.org/noise.html#introduction), giving every leg of the workflow mutually-authenticated, end-to-end-encrypted channels between participating nodes. On-chain submissions (DNS and PartyToParticipant transactions) continue to flow through Canton's standard topology path; Noise is only used for the off-chain coordination that has to happen between nodes.

Reviewer 2: Why wouldn't you just implement the workflow you are describing above as a dApp using Daml contracts and signing topology transactions using the dApp API? 

The main point of the DND bootstrapping is that you need a trusted channel between the initial owners to exchange the fingerprints of the public keys and the synchronizer id among the actors. This is literally what you get out of the box if you do this directly on ledger. 

In that sense I don't know why you are proposing to use another P2P protocol for this. Sounds too complex and cumbersome without any true benefit.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the push - this is fair and you are right that bootstrapping maps cleanly onto existing Canton-native topology patterns, although as I understand would need to introduce extra complexity on the DAML side. Using an off-ledger channel makes this step faster and cheaper as far as I see. Also, this is how we bootstrapped CBTC, so this is the system we know and extended to this framework.

Nevertheless, this is where Phase 2 and beyond is heading: we would migrate away from any off-chain (or off-topology) orchestration for bootstrapping and node registration. Phase 1 uses our existing framework, which has been in production for quite some time, so is a tested and code-complete system.

Noise does carry some node-to-node operations that don't really need to be on-ledger (mostly for cost considerations), like DAR-distribution, liveness/heartbeat flows, etc. Arguably these could be handled through regular HTTPS/mTLS, but we find that noise is easy and well-suited for decentralized systems.

All in all, we agree and aim to phase out noise in a future release, seeing now a potential for simplifying the system. Let us know what you think.

Author: @daravep following up on this, any additional comments, remarks or feedback? Thanks!

#### 3.2 Plugin-Based Governance Framework

The governance engine ("Governance Core") decouples the governance mechanism from application-specific logic.

**Governance Core** provides:

- Standardized propose/confirm/execute lifecycle for any DAML-based action
- Configurable m-of-n threshold enforcement with no administrative override
- Plugin Manager for uploading DARs, deploying governance contracts, and registering plugins
- REST API (25+ endpoints) for governance operations
- Privacy-preserving governance audit trail recording all votes, threshold changes, member-removal events, and action execution history
- Dynamic Membership Management, phase 1: remove-node-from-set workflow (add-member is deferred to the Phase 4 follow-up proposal, dependent on ACS migration)

**Plugins** are DAML packages defining domain-specific governance actions. Each plugin registers action types with Governance Core and inherits the propose/confirm/execute workflow. The following Daml templates are in scope for this proposal as open-source reference implementations:

> - **Token Management Daml template** - governed token issuance, minting, and burning operations, wrapping the utility and registry functions needed for third-party tokens

Reviewer: How does the differ from CIP-56 and CIP-97 standards?

Author: The token management plugin doesn't compete with CIP-56 - it complements it. CIP-56 standardizes the token APIs (metadata, holdings, transfers, allocations) that wallets and apps consume. The token management Daml template is a governance wrapper around the registry/utility functions (issuance, mint, burn) that any token registry needs to implement on its side. So you can use Decentralization Manager to launch a fully CIP-56-compliant token whose registry operations are governed by a decentralized party instead of a single operator.
CIP-97 isn't relevant here - it's a governance CIP about Nasdaq's Super Validator participation, not a token or registry standard unless I misunderstood your question.

Reviewer: May have CIP number wrong but Token Standard V2 was the intent of the question.

Author: For CIP-112 (Token Standard V2), DecMan doesn't have support for it as it's not live yet but same answer as CIP-56 - no conflict. Token Standard V2 defines the token APIs; Decentralization Manager will let you (in the future) launch and govern a V2-compliant token through a decentralized party instead of a single operator. The two sit at different layers.

- Case studies co-authored with the adopter teams

**Value Proposition.** Demonstrates that the tooling is genuinely a common good - other teams on Canton are building on it, not just BitSafe. This is the clearest possible evidence that the grant has delivered ecosystem value.

**Acceptance Criteria.** By the end of Milestone 3, at least two production applications meet all of the following:

- Operated by an entity other than BitSafe.
- Not a pre-existing BitSafe integration partner whose decentralized party setup was scoped before this grant. New partners only, or pre-existing partners whose use of the Decentralization Manager is materially independent of BitSafe's CBTC integration work.
- Independent governance decisions observable on Canton MainNet, queryable via the on-chain governance audit trail (i.e., real propose/confirm/execute cycles initiated and signed by the third-party operator's own party members; BitSafe may be a member of that party).

## Funding

**Total Funding Request:**

### Milestone Allocation

| Milestone | CC Amount | Payment Trigger |

> | :---- | :---- | :---- |
> | M1 - Open-Source Release of Core Decentralization Manager Tooling | 5,000,000 CC | Committee acceptance + open-source release on Canton Foundation GitHub + BitSafe-operated CBTC reference instance live on MainNet as proof point |
> | M2 - Ongoing Maintenance (12 months) | 1,000,000 CC | Paid against quarterly maintenance reports |
> | M3 - Ecosystem Adoption | 2,500,000 CC | >=2 non-BitSafe applications in production on Canton MainNet using the Decentralization Manager, with live governance activity visible on-chain |
> | **Total** | **8,500,000 CC** |  |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| M1 - Open-Source Release of Core Decentralization Manager Tooling | 4,000,000 CC | Committee acceptance + open-source release on Canton Foundation GitHub + BitSafe-operated CBTC reference instance live on MainNet as proof point |
| M2 - Ongoing Maintenance (12 months) | 1,000,000 CC | Paid against quarterly maintenance reports |
| M3 - Ecosystem Adoption | 3,500,000 CC | >=5 non-BitSafe applications in production on Canton MainNet using the Decentralization Manager, with live governance activity visible on-chain |
| **Total** | **8,500,000 CC** |  |
```

Reviewer 4: Note that M3 (3.5M) can be split on applications and recieved seperatly
